# Incident: 2025-04-08 09-30-21

## Summary

Between the hour of 19:00 and 21:27 UTC on April 8, 2025, approximately 155 users encountered jwt-pizza order failures. The event was triggered by a chaos test at about 19:00. The order failures contained an error that resulted in being unable to process requests and always returning a 500 server error response.

A bug in this code caused the 500 code responses and order failures. The event was detected by Grafana metrics logging. The team started working on the event by analyzing the response objects returned and investigating potential causes for the specific error message returned. This critical incident affected 100% of active users that requested an order while it was active.

There was further impact as noted by 19 calls to support that were raised in relation to this incident.
## Detection

This incident was detected when the Grafana On-call alert was triggered and Ammon Harps was paged.

Self-healing DevOps practices will be set up by Ammon Harps so that should this error arrise again, the system will be able to automatically call the required endponts to negate the problem and restore system funtionality autonomously. 
## Impact
For 2 hrs 27 minutes between 19:00 UTC and 21:27 UTC on April 8, 2025, all jwt-pizza order api calls failed due to a server-side error.

This incident affected approximately 155 customers (100% of users that ordered during the mentioned timeframe), who experienced order failure errors.

3 support tickets and 2 social media posts were submitted.
## Timeline

All times are UTC.

- _19:00_ Server failure error beings affecting users.
- _21:00_ Server error count reaches capacity to trigger an alert.
- _21:00_ Alert sent to Ammon Harps
- _21:05_ Ammon responds to alert and logs in to system.
- _21:08_ Ammon tests both JWT-Pizza and JWT-Pizza-Service to make sure they are running properly.
- _21:15_ Ammon deploys and new release of JWT-Pizza. The problem is not resolved.
- _21:18_ Ammon checks AWS CloudFront Distributions and Database integrity but finds no issues.
- _21:23_ Ammon recovers error logging messages from failed response objects and obtains url, api key, and code to fix the error.
- _21:24_ Ammon attempts to make various PUT and POST requests to the url but is rejected with an "unauthorized" message each time.
- _21:25_ Ammon attempts various header and body request formats but none are successful.
- _21:27_ Ammon successfully calls the report endpoint and resolves the server failure using a GET request.
## Response
After receiving a page at 21:00, Ammon Harps came online at 21:05 UTC in JWT-Pizza-Service and JWT-Pizza. Ammon first attempted to check all JWT-Pizza and JWT-Pizza-Service deployments in AWS as well as the database integrity, which although valid places to check for failure, ultimately delayed the time taken to resolve the issue at hand.
## Root Cause
A bug in the backend server api error handling led to repeated failure on the /api/order endpoint. 
## Resolution
Report URL, API key, and server code obtained from failed response object.
Various attempts to make API call using url, key, and code failed.
Successfully called the url with the required parameters using a GET request.
The backend api handling was restored.

The time required to response to this incident could be greatly reduced by automating the process of calling the correct report endpoint that resolves the issue (as returned by the 500 level response error message).
## Prevention
This is the first incident of its kind in JWT-Pizza, but further investigation into other api endpoints has been scheduled in order to prevent other endpoint failures in the future. Grafana alerts could also be altered so that it triggers much sooner after the initial failure detection that affects users. Thresholds should be lowered.
## Action Items
1. Test other api endpoints for similar failure possibilities and correct them if possible.
2. Lower Grafana alert thresholds.
3. Implement logic that triggers after a series of repeated failures which automatically calls the required reporting endpoints should this issue come up again. The system can become self-healing and mitigate the problem on its own.

All features and prevention initiatives are being tracked on Github and have been assigned to Ammon Harps.

